[DX-1190] Release Notes 5.3 Tyk Dashboard (#4039)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/product-stack/tyk-dashboard/release-notes/version-5.3.md

---
title: Tyk Dashboard 5.3 Release Notes
date: 2023-09-27T15:49:11Z
description: "Release notes documenting updates enhancements, and changes for Tyk Dashboard versions within the 5.3.X series."
tags: ["Tyk Dashboard", "Release notes", "v5.3", "5.3.0", "5.3", "changelog"]
---

<!-- Required. oss or licensed. Choose one of the following:
    **Licensed Protected Product**
    Or
    ****Open Source** ([Mozilla Public License](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk/blob/master/LICENSE.md))**
-->

**This page contains all release notes for version 5.3.X displayed in a reverse chronological order**

## Support Lifetime
<!-- Required. replace X.Y with this release and set the correct quarter of the year -->
Our minor releases are supported until our next minor comes out.

---

## 5.3.0 Release Notes

### Release Date DD Mon YYYY <<update>>

### Breaking Changes

> <!-- Required. Use the following statement if there are no breaking changes, or explain if there are -->

Reviewer: @andyo-tyk Since the GW has breaking changes and it's a fundamental component, I think we should mention that with a link to the GW breaking changes

    Or
    ****Open Source** ([Mozilla Public License](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk/blob/master/LICENSE.md))**
-->

**This page contains all release notes for version 5.3.X displayed in a reverse chronological order**

## Support Lifetime
<!-- Required. replace X.Y with this release and set the correct quarter of the year -->
Our minor releases are supported until our next minor comes out.

---

## 5.3.0 Release Notes

### Release Date DD Mon YYYY <<update>>

### Deployment Options for Tyk Dashboard

#### Tyk Cloud
Tyk 5.3.0 will be available on Tyk Cloud in the coming weeks. We'll update this page once it's ready.

#### Self-Managed
This release is ready for installation on your own infrastructure.

### Breaking Changes

**Attention: Please read this section carefully.**

#### Tyk OAS APIs are not backwards-compatible

This upgrade transitions Tyk OAS APIs out of [Early Access]({{< ref "frequently-asked-questions/using-early-access-features" >}}). 

- **Out of Early access**
  - This means that from now on, all Tyk OAS APIs will be backwards compatible and in case of a downgrade from 5.3.X to 5.3.0, the Tyk OAS API definitions will always work.

> - **Not Backwards Compatibility**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Not Backwards Compatibile**
```

> - **Not Backwards Compatibility**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Not Backwards Compatible**
```

Reviewer: @dcs3spp

>   - Tyk OAS APIs in Tyk Dashboard v5.3.0 are not [backwards compatible](https://tinyurl.com/3xy966xn). This means that the new Tyk OAS API format created by Tyk Gateway/Dashboard v5.3.X does not work with older versions of Tyk Gateway/Dashboard, i.e. you cannot export these API definitions from a v5.3.X Tyk Dashboard and import to an earlier version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Tyk OAS APIs in Tyk Dashboard v5.3.0 are not [backwards compatible](https://tinyurl.com/3xy966xn). This means that the new Tyk OAS API format used by Tyk Gateway/Dashboard v5.3.X does not work with older versions of Tyk Gateway/Dashboard, i.e. you cannot export these API definitions from a v5.3.X Tyk Dashboard and import to an earlier version.
```

  - The upgrade is **not reversible**, i.e. you cannot use version 5.3.X Tyk OAS API definitions with an older version of Tyk Dashboard.

>   - This means that if you wish to downgrade or revert to your previous version of Tyk, you will need to restore these API definitions from a backup. Please go to the [backup]({{< ref "#essential-steps-before-upgrade" >}}) section for detailed instructions on backup before upgrading to v5.3.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - This means that if you wish to downgrade or revert to your previous version of Tyk, you will need to restore these API definitions from a backup. Please go to the [backup]({{< ref "#upgrade-instructions" >}}) section for detailed instructions on backup before upgrading to v5.3.0.
```

  - If you are not using Tyk OAS APIs, Tyk will maintain backward compatibility standards.
- **Historic Tyk OAS API Definition Compatibility**
  - Tyk OAS API Definitions prior to v5.3.0 are not compatible with Tyk Gateway v5.3.X.
  - This means that any Tyk OAS APIs created in any previous release (4.1.0-5.2.x) cannot work with the new Tyk Dashboard without being migrated to the new format.
- **After upgrade (the good news)**
  - If you had a Tyk OAS API prior to v5.3.0 then Tyk Dashboard will automatically update the API definition to [latest format]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc" >}}).
  - This means that you do not have to do anything to make your Tyk OAS APIs compatible with the new 5.3.0 release as Tyk Dashboard will take care of that during start-up.
- **MDCB deployment and Tyk OAS APIs**

>   - MDCB users utilising Tyk OAS APIs **should wait for the release of MDCB v2.5** before upgrading Tyk Gateway and Dashboard to v5.3.0. This means Tyk OAS APIs will not be loaded with MDCB v2.4 or older.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Tyk OAS APIs created in Tyk v5.3.0 will not be loaded by the data plane gateways if you are using MDCB v2.4 or older. This means that MDCB users already working with Tyk OAS APIs **must wait for the release of MDCB v2.5** before upgrading Tyk Gateway and Dashboard to v5.3.0. 
```

I think this reordering makes the behaviour clearer -> given that MDCB 2.4.x cannot handle 5.3.0 Tyk OAS API definitions, users must wait for MDCB 2.5.0

Reviewer: you explain that `given that MDCB` is in the beginning, is the root but in the sentence, it's not. as before, since it's "given", it should be in the beginning

>   - For MDCB users using Tyk OAS APIs, Tyk Dashboard 5.3.0 will only work with Tyk Gateway v5.3.0 and MDCB v2.5.X. Older versions of Tyk Gateway may not function correctly with v5.3.0 Tyk OAS API definitions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Tyk OAS APIs managed by Tyk Dashboard v5.3.0 in a distributed deployment will only work with Tyk Gateway v5.3.0 and MDCB v2.5.X. Older versions of Tyk Gateway may not function correctly with v5.3.0 Tyk OAS API definitions.
```

Is this clearer?

>   - For MDCB users using Tyk OAS APIs, Tyk Dashboard 5.3.0 will only work with Tyk Gateway v5.3.0 and MDCB v2.5.X. Older versions of Tyk Gateway may not function correctly with v5.3.0 Tyk OAS API definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For distributed deployments (i.e. MDCB), Tyk Dashboard v5.3.0 managing Tyk OAS APIs requires Tyk Gateway v5.3.0 and MDCB v2.5.X for proper functionality. Older versions of Tyk Gateway may experience compatibility issues with Tyk OAS API definitions from v5.3.0.
```

Reviewer: @dcs3spp @andyo-tyk this is a mix of both

Author: @letzya It looks ok to me @andyo-tyk ?

> Tyk Dashboard v5.3.0 managing Tyk OAS APIs requires Tyk Gateway v5.3.0 and MDCB v2.5.X for proper functionality. Older versions of Tyk Gateway may experience compatibility issues with Tyk OAS API definitions from v5.3.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Tyk Dashboard v5.3.0 managing Tyk OAS APIs requires Tyk Gateway v5.3.0 and MDCB v2.5.X for proper functionality. Older versions of Tyk Gateway may experience compatibility issues with Tyk OAS API definitions from v5.3.0.
```

  
**Important:** Please go to the [backup]({{< ref "#upgrade-instructions" >}}) section for essential instructions on how to backup before upgrading to v5.3.0
 
### Dependencies
<!--Required. Use this section to announce the following types of dependencies compatible with the release:

Version compatibility with other components in the Tyk stack. This takes the form of a compatibility matrix and is only required for Gateway and Portal.

3rd party dependencies and tools -->

#### Compatibility Matrix For Tyk Components
<!-- Required. Version compatibility with other components in the Tyk stack. This takes the form of a compatibility matrix and is only required for Gateway and Portal.
An illustrative example is shown below. -->
| Dashboard Version | Recommended Releases | Backwards Compatibility |
|----    |---- |---- |

> | 5.3.0 | MDCB v2.5     | MDCB v2.4.2 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 5.3.0 | MDCB v2.5     | MDCB v2.5 |
```

  - For MDCB users using Tyk OAS APIs, Tyk Dashboard 5.3.0 will only work with Tyk Gateway v5.3.0 and MDCB v2.5.X. Older versions of Tyk Gateway may not function correctly with v5.3.0 Tyk OAS API definitions.
 
**Important**
Please go to the [backup]({{ < ref "#essential-steps-before-upgrade" >}}) section for detailed instructions on backup before upgrading to v5.3.0
 
### Dependencies
<!--Required. Use this section to announce the following types of dependencies compatible with the release:

Version compatibility with other components in the Tyk stack. This takes the form of a compatibility matrix and is only required for Gateway and Portal.

3rd party dependencies and tools -->

#### Compatibility Matrix For Tyk Components
<!-- Required. Version compatibility with other components in the Tyk stack. This takes the form of a compatibility matrix and is only required for Gateway and Portal.
An illustrative example is shown below. -->
| Dashboard Version | Recommended Releases | Backwards Compatibility |
|----    |---- |---- |

> | 5.3.0 | MDCB v2.5     | MDCB v2.4.2 |

Reviewer: @andyo-tyk @caroltyk @lghiur  Does this mean that the backward compatibility of 2.4.x in the compatibility matrix table of release notes is incorrect?

Reviewer 2: To the best of my knowledge - yes, we shouldn't claim compatibility for 2.4.x (though strictly I think it is compatible if working exclusively with Tyk Classic APIs... that's just adding unnecessary nuance).

Reviewer 3: Yes please update to MDCB v2.5

Reviewer: @caroltyk shouldn't we add a note that if you don't use Tyk OAS APIs, mdcb 2.4 is fine? (if that's actually correct)

Reviewer 3: @letzya Does it complicate things? I would recommend they upgrade the whole package together.

Reviewer: but what if they can't? I think it's good to share this info, but we can do it later. Could you please check with @OldStubbsy for his professional opinion?

---
title: Tyk Dashboard 5.3 Release Notes
date: 2023-09-27T15:49:11Z
description: "Release notes documenting updates enhancements, and changes for Tyk Dashboard versions within the 5.3.X series."
tags: ["Tyk Dashboard", "Release notes", "v5.3", "5.3.0", "5.3", "changelog"]
---

<!-- Required. oss or licensed. Choose one of the following:
    **Licensed Protected Product**
    Or
    ****Open Source** ([Mozilla Public License](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk/blob/master/LICENSE.md))**
-->

**This page contains all release notes for version 5.3.X displayed in a reverse chronological order**

## Support Lifetime
<!-- Required. replace X.Y with this release and set the correct quarter of the year -->
Our minor releases are supported until our next minor comes out.

---

## 5.3.0 Release Notes

### Release Date DD Mon YYYY <<update>>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Deployment Options for Tyk Dashboard

#### Tyk Cloud
Tyk 5.3.0 will be available on Tyk Cloud in the coming weeks. We'll update this page once it's ready.

#### Self-Managed
This release is ready for installation on your own infrastructure.
```

Reviewer: @allaneyles

This upgrade transitions Tyk OAS APIs out of [Early Access]({{< ref "frequently-asked-questions/using-early-access-features" >}}).

- Historic Tyk OAS API Definition Compatibility: Tyk OAS API Definitions prior to version 5.3.0 are not compatible with Tyk Gateway v5.3.X.
- After upgrade: If you had a Tyk OAS API Definition prior to version 5.3.0 then the new Tyk Dashboard will automatically update for you all your definitions to use the [new format]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc" >}}).
- Non-Reversible Change: The upgrade is not reversible (i.e. you cannot use the Tyk OAS API definitions with an older Tyk Dashboard). Rollback or reverting to your previous version requires restoring these API definitions from a backup.

##### Tyk OAS API - Gateway Compatibility

- If you are using Tyk OAS APIs, Tyk Dashboard 5.3.0 would only work with Tyk Gateway v5.3.0 and MDCB v2.5. Older versions of Tyk Gateway may not function correctly with the updated Tyk OAS API definitions. 
- If you are not using Tyk OAS APIs Tyk will keep its backward compatibility standards.

#### Essential steps before upgrade

> - Back-Up Your Environment;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Back-Up Your Environment (this is the usual case with every release)
```

Additionally, a disclaimer statement was added below the table, for customers to check that the third-party dependency they decide to install remains in support.

An example is given below for illustrative purposes only. Tested Versions and Compatible Versions information will require discussion with relevant squads and QA. -->

| Third Party Dependency                                     | Tested Versions        | Compatible Versions    | Comments | 
| ---------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------- | ---------------------- | -------- | 
| [GoLang](https://go.dev/dl/)                               | 1.21       | 1.21       | [Go plugins]({{< ref "plugins/supported-languages/golang" >}}) must be built using Go 1.21 | 
| [Redis](https://redis.io/download/)  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | Used by Tyk Dashboard | 
| [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community)  | 5.0.x, 6.0.x, 7.0.x  | 4.4.x, 5.0.x, 6.0.x, 7.0.x  | Used by Tyk Dashboard | 
| [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/)         | 11.x - 15.x LTS        | 11.x - 15.x            | Used by Tyk Dashboard | 

> | [OpenAPI Specification]({{< ref "https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3" >}}) | v3.0.x      | v3.0.x          | Supported by [Tyk OAS]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc" >}})|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [OpenAPI Specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3) | v3.0.x      | v3.0.x          | Supported by [Tyk OAS]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc" >}})|
```

---
title: Tyk Dashboard 5.3 Release Notes
date: 2023-09-27T15:49:11Z
description: "Release notes documenting updates enhancements, and changes for Tyk Dashboard versions within the 5.3.X series."
tags: ["Tyk Dashboard", "Release notes", "v5.3", "5.3.0", "5.3", "changelog"]
---

<!-- Required. oss or licensed. Choose one of the following:
    **Licensed Protected Product**
    Or
    ****Open Source** ([Mozilla Public License](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk/blob/master/LICENSE.md))**
-->

**This page contains all release notes for version 5.3.X displayed in a reverse chronological order**

## Support Lifetime
<!-- Required. replace X.Y with this release and set the correct quarter of the year -->
Our minor releases are supported until our next minor comes out.

---

## 5.3.0 Release Notes

### Release Date DD Mon YYYY <<update>>

### Breaking Changes
<!-- Required. Use the following statement if there are no breaking changes, or explain if there are -->
**Attention: Please read this section carefully.**

> As Tyk OAS transitions out of [Early Access]({{< ref "frequently-asked-questions/using-early-access-features" >}}), we cannot guarantee backward compatibility for versions pre-5.3.0. When upgrading to 5.3.0, Tyk will automatically migrate existing Tyk OAS APIs to the [latest API definition format]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Tyk OAS APIs not backward compatible with pre-5.3.0 Gateways

As Tyk OAS transitions out of [Early Access]({{< ref "frequently-asked-questions/using-early-access-features" >}}), we cannot guarantee backward compatibility for versions pre-5.3.0. When upgrading to 5.3.0, Tyk will automatically migrate existing Tyk OAS APIs to the [latest API definition format]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc" >}}).
```

---
title: Tyk Dashboard 5.3 Release Notes
date: 2023-09-27T15:49:11Z
description: "Release notes documenting updates enhancements, and changes for Tyk Dashboard versions within the 5.3.X series."
tags: ["Tyk Dashboard", "Release notes", "v5.3", "5.3.0", "5.3", "changelog"]
---

<!-- Required. oss or licensed. Choose one of the following:
    **Licensed Protected Product**
    Or
    ****Open Source** ([Mozilla Public License](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk/blob/master/LICENSE.md))**
-->

**This page contains all release notes for version 5.3.X displayed in a reverse chronological order**

## Support Lifetime
<!-- Required. replace X.Y with this release and set the correct quarter of the year -->
Our minor releases are supported until our next minor comes out.

---

## 5.3.0 Release Notes

### Release Date DD Mon YYYY <<update>>

### Breaking Changes
<!-- Required. Use the following statement if there are no breaking changes, or explain if there are -->
**Attention: Please read this section carefully.**

#### Tyk OAS APIs are not backward compatible with pre-5.3.0 Definitions

> As Tyk OAS transitions out of [Early Access]({{< ref "frequently-asked-questions/using-early-access-features" >}}), we cannot guarantee backward compatibility for versions pre-5.3.0. When upgrading to 5.3.0, Tyk will automatically migrate existing Tyk OAS APIs to the [latest API definition format]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As [Tyk OAS APIs]({{< ref "getting-started/key-concepts/high-level-concepts">}}) transitions out of [Early Access]({{< ref "frequently-asked-questions/using-early-access-features" >}}), we cannot guarantee backward compatibility for versions pre-5.3.0. When upgrading to 5.3.0, Tyk will automatically migrate existing Tyk OAS APIs to the [latest API definition format]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc" >}}).
```

> As [Tyk OAS APIs]({{< ref "getting-started/key-concepts/high-level-concepts">}}) transitions out of [Early Access]({{< ref "frequently-asked-questions/using-early-access-features" >}}), we cannot guarantee backward compatibility for versions pre-5.3.0. When upgrading to 5.3.0, Tyk will automatically migrate existing Tyk OAS APIs to the [latest API definition format]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc" >}}).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As [Tyk OAS]({{< ref "getting-started/key-concepts/high-level-concepts">}}) transitions out of [Early Access]({{< ref "frequently-asked-questions/using-early-access-features" >}}), please note that backward compatibility cannot be guaranteed for versions prior to version 5.3.0. Upon upgrading to version 5.3.0, Tyk will automatically migrate Early Access Tyk OAS APIs to use the v5.3.0 [Tyk OAS API definition]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc" >}}).
```

> Tyk OAS APIs using the 5.3.0 API definition may not work with pre-5.3.0 versions of Tyk Gateway and doing so could provoke unpredictable behaviour including potential crashes. We recommend retaining copies of existing Tyk OAS API definitions before upgrading in case you choose to downgrade later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It’s crucial to understand that Tyk OAS APIs using the v5.3.0 API definition may not function correctly with Tyk Gateway versions prior to v5.3.0. Attempting to do so may result in unpredictable behaviour, including potential crashes. To mitigate any risks, we strongly recommend retaining copies of existing Tyk OAS API definitions before proceeding with the upgrade, as it is not possible to rollback to previous versions after updating to the v5.3.0 API definition. 
```

> Users are strongly advised to follow the recommended upgrade instructions provided by Tyk before applying any updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users are strongly advised to follow the recommended [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk) provided by Tyk before applying any updates.
```

> Users are strongly advised to follow the recommended [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk) provided by Tyk before applying any updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users are strongly advised to follow the recommended [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk) before applying any updates.
```

| | EDP v1.8.3 | EDP all versions |
| | Pump v1.9.0 | Pump all versions |
| | TIB (if using standalone) v1.5.1 | TIB all versions |

#### 3rd Party Dependencies & Tools
<!-- Required. Third-party dependencies encompass tools (GoLang, Helm etc.), databases (PostgreSQL, MongoDB etc.) and external software libraries. This section should be a table that presents the third-party dependencies and tools compatible with the release. Compatible is used in the sense of those versions tested with the releases. Such information assists customers considering upgrading to a specific release.

Additionally, a disclaimer statement was added below the table, for customers to check that the third-party dependency they decide to install remains in support.

An example is given below for illustrative purposes only. Tested Versions and Compatible Versions information will require discussion with relevant squads and QA. -->

| Third Party Dependency                                     | Tested Versions        | Compatible Versions    | Comments | 
| ---------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------- | ---------------------- | -------- | 

> | [GoLang](https://go.dev/dl/)                               | 1.19, 1.20, 1.21       | 1.19, 1.20, 1.21       | All our binaries| 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [GoLang](https://go.dev/dl/)                               | 1.21       | 1.21       | [Go plugins]({{< ref "plugins/supported-languages/golang" >}}) must be built using Go 1.21 | 
```

| [Redis](https://redis.io/download/)  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | Used by Tyk Dashboard | 
| [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community)  | 5.0.x, 6.0.x, 7.0.x  | 4.4.x, 5.0.x, 6.0.x, 7.0.x  | Used by Tyk Dashboard | 
| [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/)         | 11.x - 15.x LTS        | 11.x - 15.x            | Used by Tyk Dashboard | 

> | OpenAPI JSON Schema  | v3.0.0...      | v3.0.0...          | Used by [Tyk OAS API definition](https://swagger.io/specification/)                | [3.0.3](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3)|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [OpenAPI Specification]({{< ref "https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3" >}}) | v3.0.x      | v3.0.x          | Supported by [Tyk OAS]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc" >}})|
```

> Given the time difference between your upgrade and the release of this version, we recommend customers verify the ongoing support of third-party dependencies they install, as their status may have changed since the release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given the potential time difference between your upgrade and the release of this version, we recommend users verify the ongoing support of third-party dependencies they install, as their status may have changed since the release.
```

#### Enhanced User Permissions

 Introducing field-based permissions via the Dashboard specifically tailored for GraphQL APIs. Users can now define granular access control for API key holders based on types and fields from a GraphQL schema. This feature enhances security and flexibility in managing API access, providing a more tailored and secure experience for users.

 #### Global Header Management 

 We've introduced global header management specifically for UDG, simplifying header configuration across all data sources. Users can now effortlessly add, adjust, and delete multiple global headers, ensuring consistency and efficiency throughout API management, ultimately saving developers time and effort

> #### Enhanced Analytics
> We have expanded our analytics capabilities by extending APIs for fetching graph analytics from SQL databases. Users can now gain valuable insights into error trends and usage patterns for GraphQL APIs. With the addition of popularity and error bar charts, users can delve deeper into their data, facilitating optimization and troubleshooting efforts.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### GraphQL focused analytics
We have made the first step towards bringing our users GraphQL-focused monitoring capabilities. Users can now gain valuable insights into error trends and usage patterns for GraphQL APIs, when storing graph analytics in SQL databases. With the addition of popularity and error bar charts, users can delve deeper into their data, facilitating optimization and troubleshooting efforts.
```
